[4:0] In the name of God, the Almighty, the Merciful.
[4:1] O people, be aware of your Lord who has created you from one person and He created from it its mate and sent forth from it many men and many women; and be aware of God whom you ask about, and the relatives. God is Watcher over you.
[4:2] And give the orphans their money, and do not replace the good with the bad, and do not consume their money with your money; for truly this is a great sin!
[4:3] And if you fear that you cannot be just to the orphans, then you may marry those who are agreeable to you of the women: two, and three, and four. But if you fear you will not be fair, then only one, or whom you maintain by your oaths. This is best that you do not face financial hardship.
[4:4] And give the women their dues willingly, and if they remit any of it to you of their own will, then you may take it with good feelings.
[4:5] And do not give the immature ones your money for which God has made you overseers, and spend on them from it and clothe them, and speak to them in goodness.
[4:6] And test the orphans when they reach puberty, then, if you have determined from them comprehension, then give them their money, and do not deliberately consume it wastefully or quickly before they grow up. And whoever is rich, then let him not claim anything, and if he is poor then let him consume in kindness. If you give to them their money, then make a witness for them, and God is enough for Reckoning.
[4:7] For the men is a portion from what the parents and the relatives left behind, and for the women is a portion from what the parents and relatives left behind, be it little or much; a forced portion.
[4:8] And if the distribution is attended by the relatives and the orphans and the needy, then you shall give them part of it and say to them a kind saying.
[4:9] And let them be concerned, that if it was they who had left behind them a weak progeny, would they not fear for them? Let them reverence God and let them say what is appropriate.
[4:10] Those who consume the money of the orphans illicitly, in fact they are consuming fire in their bellies, and they will endure the Blaze.
[4:11] God directs you regarding your children: "To the male shall be as that given to two females; however, if the women are more than two, then they will have two thirds of what is left behind; and if she is only one, then she will have one half. And to his parents, each one of them shall have one sixth of what is left behind, if he has a child. If he has no child, and his parents are the heirs, then to his mother is one third; and if he has siblings then to his mother is one sixth. All after a will is carried through or a debt. Your parents and your children, you do not know which are closer to you in benefit-a directive from God, for God is Knowledgeable, Wise."
[4:12] And for you is half from your wives of what is left behind, if they have no child; however, if they have a child, then to you is one quarter of what is left behind. All after a will is carried through or a debt. And to them is one quarter of what is left behind, if you have no child; however, if you have a child, then to them is one eighth of what is left behind. All after a will is carried through or a debt. And if a man or a woman who is being inherited has no dependents, but has a brother or a sister, then to each one of them is one sixth, but if they are more than this then they are to share in one third. All after a will is carried through or a debt, to avoid causing harm. A directive from God, and God is Knowledgeable, Compassionate.
[4:13] These are the boundaries of God, and whoever obeys God and His messenger, He will admit him to estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein. This is the great triumph.
[4:14] And whoever disobeys God and His messenger, and transgresses His boundaries, He will admit him to a Fire, abiding therein, and he will have a humiliating retribution.
[4:15] And those of your women who commit lewdness, you shall bring four witnesses over them from among you; if they bear witness, then you shall restrict them in the homes until death terminates their lives, or God makes for them a way out.
[4:16] And the two men who commit it from among you, you shall trouble them. If they repent and reform, then leave them alone. God is Redeemer, Merciful.
[4:17] Repentance is only for those who commit a sin out of ignorance and then repent soon after; these will be forgiven by God, for God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[4:18] And there will be no repentance for those who commit sin then when death comes upon any one of them he says: "I repent now!" Nor for those who die while they are rejecters. For those We have prepared a painful retribution.
[4:19] O you who believe, it is not lawful for you to inherit from the women by force. And do not make difficulty for them so that you may take away some of what you have given them, unless they commit a clear lewdness. And live with them in kindness. If you dislike them, then perhaps you dislike something while God makes in it much good.
[4:20] And if you wish to replace one wife with another, and you have given one of them a large amount, then do not take anything from it. Will you take it by falsehood while it is clearly a sin?
[4:21] And how can you take it when you have become intimate with each other, and they have taken from you a solemn covenant.
[4:22] And do not marry who your fathers had married from the women, except what has already been done. It is a lewdness, and an abhorrence, and an evil path.
[4:23] Forbidden for you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your sisters, and the sisters of your father, and the sisters of your mother, and the daughters of your brother, and the daughters of your sister, and your foster mothers who suckled you, and your sisters from suckling, and the mothers of your women, and your step-daughters who are in your lodgings from your women with whom you have already consummated the marriage; if you have not consummated the marriage then there is no sin upon you; and those who were in wedlock with your sons who are from your seed, and that you join between two sisters except what has already been done. God is Forgiving, Merciful.
[4:24] And the independent from the women, except those maintained by your oaths; the book of God over you; and permitted for you is what is beyond this, if you are seeking with your money to be independent, not for illicit sex. As for those whom you have already had joy with, then you shall give them their dowries as an obligation. There is no sin upon you for what you agree on after the obligation. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[4:25] And whoever of you cannot afford to marry the independent female believers, then from those maintained by your oaths of the believing young women. And God is more aware of your faith, some of you to each other. You shall marry them with the permission of their parents, and give them their dowries in kindness-to be independent-not for illicit sex or taking lovers. Until they become independent, any of them who comes with an immorality shall have half of what is the punishment for those who are independent. This is for those who fear hardship from among you. But if you are patient it is better for you, and God is Forgiver, Merciful.
[4:26] God wants to clarify for you and guide you to the paths of those before you, and pardon you, and God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[4:27] And God wants to pardon you, but those who follow desires want that you would be diverted into a great diversion.
[4:28] God wants to alleviate for you; and mankind was created weak.
[4:29] O you who believe, do not consume your money between you unjustly, unless it is through a trade which is mutually agreed by you. And do not kill yourselves; God is Merciful towards you.
[4:30] And whoever does so out of animosity and transgression, We will cast him to a Fire; and this for God is very easy.
[4:31] If you avoid the major sins that you are prohibited against, then We will cancel your existing sins and admit you to a generous entrance.
[4:32] And do not envy that which God has graced some of you over others with. For the men is a portion of what they earned, and for the women is a portion of what they earned. And ask God from His grace; God is knowledgeable in all things.
[4:33] And for each We have made inheritors for what was left behind by the parents and the relatives. And those bound by your oaths, you shall give them their portion. God is witness over all things.
[4:34] The men are to support the women with what God has bestowed upon them over one another and for what they spend of their money. The upright females are devoted; keeping private the personal matters for what God keeps watch over. As for those females from whom you fear desertion, then you shall advise them, and abandon them in the bedchamber, and separate from them. If they respond to you, then do not seek a way over them; God is Most High, Great.
[4:35] And if you fear a permanent rift between them, then send a judge from his family and a judge from her family. If they want to reconcile, then God will bring them together. God is Knowledgeable, Expert.
[4:36] And serve God and do not set up anything with Him, and do good to the parents, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the needy, and the neighbor who is a relative, and the neighbor nearby, and the friend nearby, and the wayfarer, and those maintained by your oaths. God does not love the arrogant, the boastful.
[4:37] Those who are stingy and order the people to stinginess, and they conceal what God has given them from His bounty. And We have prepared for the rejecters a humiliating retribution.
[4:38] And those who spend their money to show off to the people, and they do not believe in God or the Last Day. And whoever has the devil as his associate, then what a miserable associate!
[4:39] What would bother them if they believed in God and the Last Day and spent from the provisions of God? God is aware of them.
[4:40] Indeed, God does not wrong the weight of an atom; and if it is good He will double it. And He grants from Himself a great recompense.
[4:41] How is it then when We bring forth from every nation a witness, and bring you as a witness over these?
[4:42] On that Day those who rejected and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth would swallow them; but they cannot hide any narrative from God.
[4:43] O you who believe, do not come near the contact prayer while you are intoxicated, until you know what you are saying. Nor if you have had intercourse, unless a wayfarer, until you wash. And if you are ill, or traveling, or one of you has excreted feces, or you had sexual contact with the women, and could not find water, then you shall select from the clean soil; you shall wipe your faces and hands. God is Pardoning, Forgiving.
[4:44] Did you not note those who have been given a portion of the Book? They purchased straying, and they want you to stray from the path.
[4:45] And God is fully aware of your enemies; and God is enough as a supporter, and God is enough as a victor.
[4:46] From among those who are Jewish are some who take the words out of context, and they say: "We hear and disobey, and listen but let not any listen, and shepherd us," in a twisting of their tongues and as a mockery of the system! And had they said: "We hear and obey, and listen, and watch over us," it would have been better for them and more upright; but God has cursed them for their disbelief, they do not believe except very little.
[4:47] O you who have received the Book, believe in what We have sent down affirming what is with you, before We cast down faces and turn them on their backs or curse them as the people of the Sabbath were cursed. And the will of God is always done.
[4:48] God does not forgive that partners be set up with Him, and He forgives other than that for whom He pleases. Whoever sets up partners with God has indeed invented a great sin.
[4:49] Did you not note those who ascribe purity to themselves? No, it is God who purifies whom He wills, and they will not be wronged in the least.
[4:50] See how they invent lies about God! And that is enough as a clear sin.
[4:51] Did you not note those who were given a portion of the Book, they believe in sorcery and evil, and they say to those who rejected: "You are better guided than those who believed the path."
[4:52] These are the ones whom God has cursed, and whoever God curses, you will not find for him a victor.
[4:53] Or would they have a portion of the sovereignty? If so, then they would not give the people a speck.
[4:54] Or do they envy the people for what God has given them of His bounty? We have given the descendants of Abraham the Book and the wisdom; We have given them a great kingship.
[4:55] Some of them believed in it, and some of them turned away from it. In Hell will be enough flames.
[4:56] Those who have rejected Our revelations, We will admit them to a Fire. Every time their skins are cooked, We replace them with other skins that they may taste the retribution. God is Noble, Wise.
[4:57] And those who believe and do good, We will admit them to estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein eternally, in it they will have pure mates, and We will admit them to a vast shade.
[4:58] God orders you to deliver anything you have been entrusted with to its owners. And if you judge between the people, then you shall judge with justice. It is always the best that God prescribes for you. God is Hearer, Seer.
[4:59] O you who believe, obey God and obey the messenger and those in authority among you. But if you dispute in any matter, then you shall refer it to God and His messenger if you believe in God and the Last Day. That is better and more suitable for knowing.
[4:60] Did you not note those who claimed they believed in what was sent down to you and what was sent before you? They wanted to seek judgment using evil, while they were ordered to reject it. It is the devil who wants to lead them far astray.
[4:61] And if they are told: "Come to what God has sent down and to the messenger," you see the hypocrites turning away from you strongly.
[4:62] Why then, when disaster befalls them for what their hands have delivered, do they come to you swearing by God that they only wanted to do good and reconcile?
[4:63] These are a people whom God knows what is in their hearts, so turn away from them and advise them, and say to them in their souls a clear saying.
[4:64] We do not send a messenger except to be obeyed with the permission of God. And had they come to you when they had wronged themselves and sought the forgiveness of God, and the messenger sought forgiveness for them, they would have then found God to be Pardoning, Merciful.
[4:65] No, by your Lord, they will not believe until they make you judge in what they dispute with each other, then they will not find in their souls any animosity for what you have decided, and they will comply completely.
[4:66] And had We decreed for them: "Kill yourselves," or "Leave your land," they would not have done so except for a few of them. And if they had done what they were advised with, it would have been better for them and helped to strengthen them.
[4:67] Then We would have given them from Us a great recompense.
[4:68] And We would have guided them to a straight path.
[4:69] And whoever obeys God and the messenger will be among those whom God has blessed from the prophets and the truthful and the martyrs and the upright. What an excellent companionship!
[4:70] That is the bounty from God; and God knows what is best.
[4:71] O you who believe, take your precaution by going out in clusters, or going out all together.
[4:72] And from among you are those who would slow behind, so that if disaster befalls you he would say: "God has blessed me that I was not a martyr with them!"
[4:73] And if grace from God benefits you, he will speak as if there had not been affection between you and him: "Oh, I wish I had been with them so I would have triumphed a great triumph."
[4:74] Let those who seek to purchase the Hereafter rather than this world fight in the cause of God. And whoever fights in the cause of God and is killed or attains victory, then We will grant him a great recompense.
[4:75] And why do you not fight in the cause of God, when the weak among the men and women and children say: "Our Lord, bring us out of this town whose people are wicked, and grant us from Yourself a supporter, and grant us from Yourself a victor!"
[4:76] Those who believe fight in the cause of God, while those who reject fight in the cause of evil; so fight the supporters of the devil, for the planning of the devil is weak.
[4:77] Did you not note those who were told: "Cease your aggression, and hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification." But when fighting was decreed for them, a group of them were concerned towards the people as they would have been concerned towards God or even more so. And they said: "Our Lord, why did You decree fighting for us? If only You would delay for us until another time." Say: "The enjoyment of this world is little, and the Hereafter is far better for those who are aware; you will not be wronged in the least."
[4:78] Wherever you may be, death will find you, even if you are in fortified towers. If any good befalls them, they say: "This is from God," and if any evil befalls them, they say: "This is from you!" Say: "All is from God;" what is wrong with these people, they barely understand any narrative!
[4:79] Any good that befalls you is due to God, and any evil that befalls you is due to yourself. We have sent you as a messenger to the people and God is enough as a witness.
[4:80] Whoever obeys the messenger has obeyed God; and whoever turns away, We have not sent you as a guardian over them.
[4:81] And they say: "Obedience" but when they come out from being with you a group of them prepares for other than what you have said, and God records what they planned. So turn away from them and put your trust in God. God is enough for your trust.
[4:82] Do they not reflect on the Qur'an? If it was from any other than God they would have found in it many a discrepancy.
[4:83] And if any matter regarding security, or fear, comes to them they make it publicly known, but if they had referred it to the messenger and to those entrusted from them then it would have been known by those who studied it from them. And had it not been for the grace of God upon you and His mercy, you would have followed the devil, except for a few.
[4:84] So fight in the cause of God; you are not responsible except for yourself. And enjoin the believers: "Perhaps God will put a stop to the might of those who disbelieved." And God is far Mightier and far more Punishing.
[4:85] Whoever intercedes with a good intercession, he will have a reward of it; and whoever intercedes with an evil intercession, he will receive a share of it. And God has control over all things.
[4:86] And if you are greeted with a greeting, then return an even better greeting or return the same. God is Reckoning over all things.
[4:87] God, there is no god except He. He will gather you for the Day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt. Who is more truthful a narrative than God?
[4:88] What is the matter with you that you are divided into two groups over the hypocrites, while God has regressed them for what they have earned? Do you want to guide those whom God misguides? Whoever God causes to be misguided, you will never find for him a path.
[4:89] They hope that you will reject as they have rejected, then you will be the same. Do not take any of them as allies until they emigrate in the cause of God. If they turn away, then take them and kill them wherever you find them; and do not take from them any ally or supporter.
[4:90] Except for those who reach a people with whom you have a covenant, or if they come to you with a reluctance in their chests to fight you or to fight their own people. Had God willed He would have given them strength and they would have fought you. But if they retire from you, and do not fight you, and they offer you peace; then God does not make for you a path against them.
[4:91] You will find others who want to be safe among you and safe among their own people. Every time they are returned to the test, they fall back in it. If they do not withdraw from you, and offer you peace, and restrain their hands, then you shall take them and kill them wherever you encounter them. For these We have given you a clear authority.
[4:92] And it is not for a believer to kill another believer except by accident. And whoever kills a believer by accident, then he shall free a believing slave, and give compensation to the family; except if they remit it. If he was from a people who are enemies to you, and he was a believer, then you shall free a believing slave. And if he was from a people with whom you have a covenant, then a compensation to his family, and free a believing slave. Whoever does not find, then the fasting of two months sequentially as a repentance from God; for God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[4:93] And whoever kills a believer intentionally, then his recompense shall be Hell, abiding therein, and God will be angry with him, and curse him, and for him is prepared a great retribution.
[4:94] O you who believe, if you strike in the cause of God, you shall investigate carefully. And do not say to he who greets you with peace: "You are not a believer!" You are seeking the vanity of this world; but with God are many riches. That is how you were before, but God graced you, so investigate carefully. God is expert over what you do.
[4:95] Not equal are those who stayed behind from the believers; except those disabled; with those who strived in the cause of God with their money and lives. God has preferred those who strive with their money and lives over those who stayed behind by a grade; and to both God has promised goodness; and God has preferred those who strived over those who stayed behind by a great reward.
[4:96] Grades from Him and forgiveness and a mercy. God is Forgiving, Merciful.
[4:97] Those whose lives are terminated by the angels, while they had wronged themselves; they said: "What situation were you in?" They said: "We were oppressed on the earth." They said: "Was the earth of God not wide enough that you could emigrate in it?" To these their abode will be Hell; what a miserable destiny!
[4:98] Except for those who were oppressed from the men, women, and children who could not devise a plan nor could be guided to a way.
[4:99] For these, perhaps God will pardon them. God is Pardoner, Forgiving.
[4:100] Whoever emigrates in the cause of God will find in the earth many spoils and a bounty. And whoever leaves his home emigrating to God and His messenger, then is overcome by death; his recompense has fallen to God, and God is Forgiving, Merciful.
[4:101] And if you go forth in the land, then there is no harm that you shorten from the contact prayer, if you fear that the rejecters will try you. The rejecters are to you a clear enemy.
[4:102] And if you are with them and you hold the contact prayer for them, then let a group from among them stand with you and let them bring their weapons; and when they have prostrated then let them be behind you; and let a group who has not yet made the contact prayer come and make the contact prayer with you, and let them be wary and let them bring their weapons with them. The rejecters hope that you would neglect your weapons and goods so they can come upon you in one blow. There is no sin upon you if you are impeded by rainfall, or if you are ill, that you place down your weapons. And be wary. God has prepared for the rejecters a humiliating retribution.
[4:103] Then, if you have completed the contact prayer, remember God while standing, or sitting, or on your sides. Then, if you are secure, hold the contact prayer. Indeed, the contact prayer for the believers is a Book that is scheduled.
[4:104] And do not falter in the pursuit of the remaining group. If you are feeling pain, then they are also feeling pain as you are; and you seek from God what they do not seek. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[4:105] We have revealed to you the Book with the truth that you may judge between the people by that which God has shown you, and do not be an advocate for the treacherous.
[4:106] And seek forgiveness from God; for God is Forgiver, Merciful.
[4:107] And do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves. God does not love those who are betrayers, sinners.
[4:108] They may conceal this from the people, but they do not conceal it from God, and He was with them when they schemed what He does not approve of to be said. God is Encompassing what they do.
[4:109] Here you are arguing on their behalf in this world, but who will argue on their behalf with God on the Day of Resurrection? Or, who will be their sponsor?
[4:110] And whoever does any evil, or wrongs himself, then seeks the forgiveness of God; he will find God is Forgiver, Merciful.
[4:111] And whoever earns any sin, then he has brought it on himself. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[4:112] And whoever does a mistake or sin, then blames it on an innocent person; he has incurred falsehood and a clear sin.
[4:113] And had it not been for the grace of God upon you and His mercy, a group of them would have obsessed on misguiding you; they would not have misguided except themselves, nor would they harm you in anything. And God has sent down to you the Book and the wisdom, and He has taught you what you did not know. And the grace of God upon you is great.
[4:114] There is no good in most of what they privately confer, except whoever orders a charity or kindness or reconciliation between the people. And whoever does this seeking the grace of God, We will give him a great recompense.
[4:115] And whoever is hostile to the messenger after the guidance has been clarified to him, and he follows other than the path of the believers; We will grant him what he has sought and deliver him to Hell; what a miserable destination.
[4:116] God does not forgive that partners be set up with Him, and He forgives other than that for whom He pleases. Whoever sets up partners with God has indeed strayed a far straying.
[4:117] They are calling on females besides Him. Indeed, they are only calling on a persistent devil.
[4:118] God has cursed him; and he said: "I will take from Your servants a sizeable portion."
[4:119] "And I will misguide them and make them desire, and I will command them, so that they will mark the ears of the livestock, and I will command them so they will make changes to the creation of God." Whoever takes the devil as a supporter other than God, then he has indeed lost a great loss.
[4:120] He promises them and makes them desire, but what the devil promises them is only vanity.
[4:121] For these, their abode shall be Hell, and they will find no escape from it.
[4:122] As for those who believe and do good works, We will admit them to estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein eternally. The promise of God is truth; and who is more truthful in saying than God?
[4:123] It will not be by what you desire, nor by what the people of the Book desire. Whoever works evil, he will be paid for it; and he will not find for himself besides God any supporter or victor.
[4:124] And whoever works good, whether male or female, and is a believer, then these will be admitted to Paradise, and they will not be wronged in the least.
[4:125] And who is better in the system than the one who submits himself to God, and he is a good doer, and he follows the creed of Abraham in monotheism? And God took Abraham as a friend.
[4:126] And to God is what is in the heavens and the earth; and God is Encompassing all things.
[4:127] And they seek a ruling regarding the women, say: "God will give you a ruling regarding them and what is being recited to you in the Book regarding the orphans' mothers whom you wish to marry but have not given them what was decreed for them, and the oppressed from the children: That you stand for the orphans in equality." Whatever good you do, then God is aware of it.
[4:128] And if a woman fears from her husband desertion or disregard, then there is no sin for them to reconcile between themselves; and reconciliation is good. And the souls are brought by need. And if you are kind and do right, then God is expert over what you do.
[4:129] And you will not be able to be fair regarding the women even if you make every effort; so do not sway too greatly and leave her as one hanging in a void. And if you reconcile and do right, then God is Forgiver, Merciful.
[4:130] And if they separate, then God will provide for each of them from His bounty. God is Vast, Wise.
[4:131] And to God is what is in the heavens and the earth; and We have instructed those who were given the Book before you, and you, to be aware of God. And if you reject, then to God is all that is in the heavens and the earth; God is Rich, Praiseworthy.
[4:132] And to God is all that is in the heavens and the earth; and God is enough as a Caretaker.
[4:133] O you people, if He wills, He can make all of you cease to exist; then He will bring others in your place. God is most capable to do this.
[4:134] Whoever seeks the reward of this world, then with God is the reward of this world and the Hereafter. God is Hearing, Watchful.
[4:135] O you who believe, stand with justice as witnesses to God, even if against yourselves, or the parents or the relatives. Even if he be rich or poor, God is more worthy of them, so do not follow desire into being unjust. And if you twist or turn away, then God is Expert over what you do.
[4:136] O you who believe; believe in God and His messenger, and the Book which was sent down to His messenger, and the Book which was sent before. And whoever rejects God, and His angels, and His Books, and His messengers, and the Last Day; then he has strayed a far straying.
[4:137] Those who believed, then rejected, then believed, then rejected, then they increased in rejection; God was not to forgive them nor to guide them to the path.
[4:138] Give news to the hypocrites that they will have a painful retribution.
[4:139] Those who take the rejecters as allies instead of the believers: "Do they seek glory with them?" All glory belongs to God.
[4:140] And it has been sent down to you in the Book, that if you hear the revelations of God being rejected and mocked, then do not sit with them until they move on to a different narrative; if not, then you are like them. God will gather the hypocrites and the disbelievers in Hell all together.
[4:141] Those who linger and observe you, if you have a victory from God they say: "Were we not with you?" And if the rejecters have success, they say: "Did we not side with you and deter the believers from you?" God will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection, and God will not grant the rejecters any success over the believers.
[4:142] The hypocrites seek to deceive God, while He is deceiving them; and if they stand to make the contact prayer, they do so lazily, only to show the people; they do not remember God except very little.
[4:143] They are swaying in-between, neither with this group nor with that group. Whoever God will misguide, you will not find for him a way.
[4:144] O you who believe, do not take the rejecters as allies instead of the believers. Do you want God to have a reason against you?
[4:145] The hypocrites will be in the lowest pit of the Fire; and you will not find for them a victor.
[4:146] Except those who repent, and amend, and hold fast to God, and are loyal in their system to God; then these will be with the believers. And God will give the believers a great recompense.
[4:147] What would God want with your punishment if you were only thankful and believed? God is Thankful, Knowledgeable.
[4:148] God does not love that any negative sayings be publicized, except if one is wronged. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
[4:149] If you reveal what is good or hide it, or forgive what is bad, then God is Pardoner, Capable.
[4:150] Those who rejected God and His messengers, and they want to make a separation between God and His messengers, and they say: "We believe in some and reject some!" And they desire to take a path in-between.
[4:151] These are the true rejecters; and We have prepared for the rejecters a humiliating retribution.
[4:152] And those who believe in God and His messengers and do not make a distinction between any of them, We will give them their recompense. And God is Forgiving, Merciful.
[4:153] The people of the Book ask you to bring down to them a book from the heaven. They had asked Moses for even more than that, for they said: "Show us God openly!" So the thunderbolt took them for their wickedness. Then they took the calf after the clarity had come to them, and We pardoned them for this; We gave Moses a clear authority.
[4:154] And We raised the mount above them by the covenant they took, and We said to them: "Enter the passageway by crouching." And We said to them: "Do not transgress the Sabbath;" and We took from them a solemn covenant.
[4:155] So, for the breaking of their covenant, and their rejection of the revelations of God, and their killing of the prophets without right, and their saying: "Our hearts are shielded." Indeed, God has stamped upon their hearts because of their rejection; they do not believe, except for a few.
[4:156] And for their rejection and their saying about Mary a great falsehood.
[4:157] And their saying: "We have killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, messenger of God!" And they had not killed him, nor crucified him, but it appeared to them as if they had. And those who dispute are in doubt regarding him, they have no knowledge except to follow conjecture; they did not kill him for a certainty.
[4:158] Instead, God had raised him to Himself; and God is Noble, Wise.
[4:159] And from the people of the Book are those who refused to believe in him before his death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be witness against them.
[4:160] Because of the wickedness from among those who are Jewish, We made unlawful to them the good things that were lawful to them; and for their deterring many from the path of God.
[4:161] And for their taking of usury, while they were prohibited from doing so, and for their consuming the money of the people unjustly. We have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful retribution.
[4:162] But those of them who are well founded in knowledge, and the believers, they believe in what was sent down to you and what was sent down before you; and those who hold the contact prayer, and those who contribute towards purification, and those who believe in God and the Last Day; to these We will give them their recompense greatly.
[4:163] We have inspired you as We had inspired Noah and the prophets after him. And We had inspired Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Patriarchs, and Jesus, and Job, and Jonah, and Aaron, and Solomon; and We gave David the Psalms.
[4:164] And messengers of whom We have told to you from before, and messengers We have not told to you; and God spoke to Moses directly.
[4:165] Messengers who were bearers of good news and warners, so that there will be no excuse for the people with God after the messengers. God is Noble, Wise.
[4:166] But God bears witness for what He has sent down to you with His knowledge, and the angels bear witness; and God is enough as a witness.
[4:167] Those who have rejected and turned away from the path of God, they have strayed a far straying.
[4:168] Those who have rejected and did wrong, God was not to forgive them, nor guide them to a path.
[4:169] Except to the path of Hell, they will abide therein eternally. For God this is very easy.
[4:170] O people, a messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord, so believe; that is better for you. And if you reject, then to God is what is in the heavens and the earth. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[4:171] O people of the Book, do not overstep in your system, nor say about God except the truth. Jesus, son of Mary, was no more than a messenger of God and His word, which He cast to Mary, and a Spirit from Him. So believe in God and His messengers, and do not say: "Three." Cease, for it is better for you. God is only One god, be He glorified that He should have a son! To Him is all that is in the heavens and the earth; and God is enough as a Caretaker.
[4:172] The Messiah is not too proud to be a servant to God, nor are the angels who are close to Him. Whoever is too proud from His service, and is arrogant, then He will gather them all towards Him together.
[4:173] As for those who believe and do good works, He will give them their recompense and increase for them from His bounty. And as for those who are too proud and arrogant, He will punish them a painful retribution, and they will not find besides God any supporter or victor.
[4:174] O people, proof has come to you from your Lord, and We have sent down to you a guiding light.
[4:175] As for those who believe in God and hold fast to Him, He will admit them in a mercy from Him and a bounty, and He will guide them to Himself, a straight path.
[4:176] They seek a ruling from you, say: "God gives you the ruling for those who have no dependants. If a person passes away and has no child, but has a sister, then she shall receive half of what is left behind; and he will inherit from her if she has no child. However, if he has two sisters, then they will receive two thirds of what is left behind; and if he has siblings, men and women, then the male shall receive twice what the female receives." God makes clear to you that you do not stray; God is aware of all things.
