[24:0] In the name of God, the Almighty, the Merciful.
[24:1] A Chapter which We have sent down and imposed, and We have sent down in it clear revelations that you may remember.
[24:2] The adulteress and the adulterer, you shall lash each of them with one hundred lashes, and do not let any pity overtake you regarding the system of God if you believe in God and the Last Day. And let a group of the believers witness their punishment.
[24:3] The adulterer will only marry an adulteress or she who is a polytheist. And the adulteress, she will only be married to an adulterer or he who is a polytheist. And such has been made forbidden for the believers.
[24:4] And those who accuse the independent females, then they do not bring forth four witnesses, you shall lash them with eighty lashes, and do not accept their testimony ever; and those are the wicked.
[24:5] Except those who repent after this and do good, then God is Forgiving, Merciful.
[24:6] And those who accuse their spouses, but they have no witnesses except for themselves, then the testimony of one of them is to be equivalent to that of four witnesses if it is sworn by God that he is being truthful.
[24:7] And the fifth shall be the curse of God upon him if he is of the liars.
[24:8] And the punishment will be averted from her if she bears witness four times by God that he is of the liars.
[24:9] And the fifth shall be the curse of God upon her if he is speaking the truth.
[24:10] All this is from the grace of God upon you and His mercy. And God is Forgiving, Wise.
[24:11] Those who have brought forth the false accusation were a group from among you. Do not think it is bad for you, for it is good for you. Every person among them will have what he deserves of the sin. And as for he who had the greatest portion of it, he will have a great retribution.
[24:12] If only when you heard it the believing males and the believing females should have thought good of their own selves and said: "This is an obvious lie!"
[24:13] If only they had brought four witnesses to it. If they did not have the witnesses, then these with God are the liars.
[24:14] And had it not been for the grace of God upon you, and His mercy in this world and the Hereafter, a great retribution would have touched you for what you have spoken.
[24:15] For you have cast it with your tongues, and you say with your mouths what you have no knowledge of, and you think it is a minor issue, while with God it was great.
[24:16] And when you heard it you should have said: "It was not right for us to speak of this. Glory be to You, this is a great lie."
[24:17] God warns you not to repeat something similar to this ever, if you are believers.
[24:18] And God clarifies for you the revelations; and God is Knower, Wise.
[24:19] As for those who enjoy that immorality spreads among those who have believed, they will have a painful retribution in the world and the Hereafter. And God knows while you do not know.
[24:20] And all this is from the favor of God upon you and His mercy. And God is Compassionate, Merciful.
[24:21] O you who believe, do not follow the footsteps of the devil. And whoever follows the footsteps of the devil should know that he advocates immorality and vice. And had it not been for the grace of God upon you and His mercy, not one of you would have ever been purified, but God purifies whom He wishes, and God is Hearer, Knower.
[24:22] And let not those among you who have been blessed by abundance refuse to give to the relatives, and the needy, and those who have immigrated in the cause of God. Let them pardon and forgive. Would you not like God to forgive you? And God is Forgiving, Merciful.
[24:23] Surely, those who accuse the independent innocent believing females, they will be cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have a painful retribution.
[24:24] On the Day when their tongues, and their hands, and their feet will bear witness against them for what they used to do.
[24:25] On that Day, God will pay them what they are owed in full, and they will know that God is the Truth Manifested.
[24:26] The wicked females are for the wicked males, and the wicked males are for the wicked females. And the good females are for the good males, and the good males are for the good females; these are innocent from what statements have been made, and for them is forgiveness and a generous provision.
[24:27] O you who believe, do not enter any homes except your own unless you perceive a welcome and you greet the people in them. This is best for you, perhaps you will remember.
[24:28] But, if you do not find anyone in them then do not enter until you are given permission. And if you are told: "Go back," then go back for it is better for you. And God is aware of what you do.
[24:29] There is no sin upon you that you enter homes which are abandoned if in them there are belongings of yours. And God knows what you reveal and what you hold back.
[24:30] Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and keep covered their private parts, for that is better for them. God is fully aware of what you do.
[24:31] And tell the believing females to lower their gaze and keep covered their private parts, and that they should not reveal their beauty except what is apparent, and let them put forth their shawls over their cleavage. And let them not reveal their beauty except to their husbands, or their fathers, or fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or the sons of their brothers, or the sons of their sisters, or their women, or those maintained by their oaths, or the male servants who are without need, or  the child who has not yet understood the composition of women. And let them not strike with their feet in a manner that reveals what they are keeping hidden of their beauty. And repent to God, all of you believers, that you may succeed.
[24:32] And marry off those among you that are single, and the good from among your male and female servants. If they are poor, then God will grant them from His grace. And God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable.
[24:33] And let those who are not able to marry continue to be chaste until God enriches them of His Bounty. And if those who are maintained by your oaths seek to consummate the marriage, then document it with them if you find that they are ready, and give them from the wealth of God which He has bestowed upon you. And do not force your young women to need if they have desired to be independent, in order that you may make a gain in the goods of this worldly life. And if anyone has compelled them, then for their compulsion, God is Forgiving, Merciful.
[24:34] And We have sent down to you clarifying revelations and an example of those who came before you and a lesson for the righteous.
[24:35] God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The example of His light is like a niche within which there is a lamp, the lamp is encased in a glass, the glass is like a radiant planet, which is lit from a blessed olive tree that is neither of the east nor of the west, its oil nearly gives off light even if not touched by fire. Light upon light, God guides to His light whom He pleases. And God sets forth examples for the people, and God is aware of all things.
[24:36] In homes that God has permitted to be raised, and His name mentioned in them. He is glorified therein in the mornings and the evenings.
[24:37] By men not distracted by trade or sale from the remembrance of God and holding the contact prayer, and contributing towards purification. They fear a Day when the hearts and sight will be overturned.
[24:38] God will reward them for the best of what they did, and He will increase them from His grace. And God provides for whom He wishes without reckoning.
[24:39] As for those who reject, their works are like a mirage in the desert. A thirsty person thinks it is water, until he reaches it, he finds it is nothing; and he finds God there and He pays him his due, and God is swift in judgment.
[24:40] Or like the darkness out in a deep ocean in the midst of violent waves, with waves upon waves and dark clouds. Darkness upon darkness, if he brings out his own hand, he could barely see it. And for whoever God does not make a light, he will have no light.
[24:41] Do you not see that everything in the heavens and the earth glorifies God? Even the birds in formation, each knows its contact prayer and its glorification. And God is fully aware of everything they do.
[24:42] And to God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and to God is the final destiny.
[24:43] Do you not see that God drives the clouds, then He joins them together, then He makes them into a stack; so you see the soft rain coming out of them? And He sends down hail from the sky from mountains, so He strikes with it whoever He wills, and He diverts it from whoever He wills; the vivid flash of its lightning almost blinds the eyes.
[24:44] God rotates the night and the day. In that is a lesson for those who have insight.
[24:45] And God created every moving creature from water. So some of them move on their bellies, and some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. God creates whatever He wills. God is capable of all things.
[24:46] We have sent down to you clarifying revelations, and God guides whoever He wills to a straight path.
[24:47] And they say: "We believe in God and in the messenger, and we obey," but a group of them turn away after that. These are not believers.
[24:48] And if they are invited to God and His messenger to judge between them, a party of them turn away.
[24:49] But, if the judgment is in their favor, they come to him readily!
[24:50] Is there a disease in their hearts, or are they doubtful? Or do they fear that God and His messenger would wrong them in the judgment? In fact, they are the wrong doers.
[24:51] The utterance of the believers when they are invited to God and His messenger to judge in their affairs is to say: "We hear and obey." These are the winners.
[24:52] And whoever obeys God and His messenger, and is concerned by God, and aware of Him, then these are the winners.
[24:53] And they swear by God with their strongest oaths that if you would only command them they would mobilize. Say: "Do not swear, for obedience is an obligation. God is Expert over what you do."
[24:54] Say: "Obey God, and obey the messenger." But if they turn away, then he is only responsible for his obligation, and you are responsible for your obligations. And if you obey him, you will be guided. The messenger is only required to deliver clearly.
[24:55] God promises those among you who believe and do good works, that He will make them successors on the earth, as He made successors of those before them, and He will enable for them their system which He has approved for them, and He will substitute security for them in place of fear: "That they serve Me, not setting up anything with Me." And as for those who reject after that, these are the wicked.
[24:56] And hold the contact prayer and contribute towards purification, and obey the messenger, that you may attain mercy.
[24:57] Do not think that those who disbelieve will remain in the land. Their abode is Hell. What a miserable destiny!
[24:58] O you who believe, let those among you who are maintained by your oaths, and those who have not attained puberty, request your permission regarding three times: before the dawn contact prayer, and when you put off your garments from the noon time, and after the evening contact prayer. These are three private times for you. Other than these times, it is not wrong for you or them to intermingle with one another. God thus clarifies the revelations for you. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[24:59] And when your children reach puberty, then let them seek your permission like it was sought by those before them. God thus clarifies His revelations for you. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
[24:60] And the women who are past child bearing, who no longer seek to get married, have no sin upon them if they put off their garments, provided they are not adorned for beauty. And if they remain as they were, then it is better for them. God is Hearer, Knower.
[24:61] There is no blame upon the blind, nor is there any blame upon the crippled, nor is there any blame upon the ill, nor is there any blame upon yourselves, if you eat at your homes, or the homes of your fathers, or the homes of your mothers, or the homes of your brothers, or the homes of your sisters, or the homes of your uncles, or the homes of your aunts, or the homes of your mothers brothers, or the homes of your mothers sisters, or that which you possess their keys, or that of your friends. You commit nothing wrong by eating together or as individuals. When you enter any home, you shall greet each other a greeting from God that is blessed and good. God thus explains the revelations for you that you may comprehend.
[24:62] The believers are those who believe in God and His messenger, and when they are with him in a meeting, they do not leave him without permission. Those who ask permission are the ones who do believe in God and His messenger. If they ask your permission, in order to attend to some of their affairs, you may grant permission to whoever you wish, and ask God to forgive them. God is Forgiver, Merciful.
[24:63] Do not let the calling of the messenger between you be as if you are calling each other. God is fully aware of those among you who slip away under flimsy excuses. Let those who oppose his command beware, for an ordeal may strike them, or a painful retribution.
[24:64] Certainly, to God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Surely, He knows what your condition is; and on the Day when they are returned to Him, He will inform them of everything they had done. God is aware of all things.
