[65:0] In the name of God, the Almighty, the Merciful.
[65:1] O prophet, if any of you have divorced the women, then they should be divorced while ensuring that their required interim is fulfilled, and keep count of the interim. You shall reverence God your Lord, and do not evict them from their homes, nor should they leave, unless they commit an evident immorality. And these are the boundaries of God. And anyone who transgresses the boundaries of God has wronged his soul. You never know; perhaps God will make something come out of this.
[65:2] Then, once the interim is fulfilled, either you remain together equitably, or part ways equitably and have it witnessed by two just people from among you; and give the testimony for God. This is to enlighten those who believe in God and the Last Day. And whoever reverences God, He will create a solution for him.
[65:3] And He will provide for him whence he never expected. Anyone who puts his trust in God, then He suffices him. The commands of God will be done. God has decreed for everything its fate.
[65:4] As for those who have reached menopause from your women, if you have any doubts, their interim shall be three months-as well as for those who did not menstruate. And those who are already pregnant, their interim is until they give birth. And anyone who reverences God, He makes his matters easy for him.
[65:5] This is the command of God that He sends down to you. And anyone who is aware of God, He will forgive his sins, and will improve his reward.
[65:6] You shall let them reside in the dwelling you were in when you were together, and do not coerce them to make them leave. And if they are pregnant, you shall spend on them until they give birth. Then, if they nurse the infant, you shall give them their due payment. And you shall maintain the amicable relations between you. If you disagree, then another woman may nurse the child.
[65:7] The rich shall provide support in accordance with his means, and the poor shall provide according to the means that God bestowed upon him. God does not burden any soul more than He has given it. God will provide ease after difficulty.
[65:8] Many a town rebelled against the command of its Lord and His messengers. Thus, We called them to account severely, and We punished them a terrible punishment.
[65:9] They tasted the result of their actions, and the consequence of their actions was a total loss.
[65:10] God has prepared for them a severe retribution. Therefore, you shall be aware of God, O you who possess intelligence and believed. God has sent down to you a remembrance.
[65:11] A messenger who recites to you the revelations of God, which are clear, to lead those who believe and work righteousness out of the darkness into the light. Anyone who believes in God and does good works, He will admit him into estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein eternally. God has granted for him an excellent reward.
[65:12] God who has created seven heavens and the same number of earths; the command is sent down between them; that you may know that God is capable of all things, and that God has encompassed all things with His knowledge.
